# Add a short-code to Notify

Date: 2021-09-20

## Status

**IN REVIEW.**

## Context

Short Codes are the foundation of mobile marketing. They allow consumers to interact with media outlets, brands, retailers, governments and all kinds of other organizations via text messaging. Instead of sending text messages to a 10-digit phone number, cell phone users send it to a Short Code – a five- or six-digit number that often spells a word or brand name. A Short Code becomes a “Common Short Code” (CSC) when the same code is activated across multiple mobile phone networks, which greatly extends its reach to many more mobile phone customers (this is from txt.ca).

As a way to give Notify a brand, we looked into getting a short code for Notify. This would allow us to put the short code on Canada.ca, which would allow us to create trust in the service.

Short codes allow customers to increase message throughput. Currently, short codes can send 100 messages/ second in comparison to long codes that can send 1 message/ 1 second.

Both USA and Canada do not look kindly upon using a singular short code for multiple services. The correct legal way for Notify to recieve a short code would be to buy a short code per service we are running.

USA currently offers a 10 DLC that Canada hasn't implemented as an alternative to short codes. The US 10DLC codes cannot be used to message Canadian numbers.

Notify currently has two pools of long codes. We have our own pool of long codes in the AWS ca-central-1 region. We also have a list of dedicated long codes setup in the AWS us-west-1 region. This is because of an AWS restriction that doesn't allow both dedicated long codes and a random pool of long codes to be in the same region at the time of this writing.

## Considerations

1. Short codes are supposed to be tied to a single service. [As can be seen from our application to AWS last year](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IbBHE_hDtXmV03FJFeB5wRWUekzmEP4Ky2x0a_lDBtg/edit), we couldn't apply the short codes to every single service.
1. Notify is the base service that is used by a multitude of governmental services. The unsubscribe feature is managed by AWS (If a customer responds to the short code with 'STOP', AWS puts the user on a do not send list). AWS allows us to remove a single user from the unsubscribe list once every 30 days. Eg: Immigration, Refugee and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) and Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA) use Notify for different usecases. The same short-code would be used by both services. This leads to problems with subscriptions as an end user might chose to unsubscribe from notifications sent by IRCC but inadvertently blocks notifications sent by CBSA.
1. We could potentially apply for a short code under the Government of Canada organization according to AWS. The templates we create for the short code should have the official Government of Canada header and footer. This might lend credibility to our application and give Notify leeway in terms of one-code for one service. Our ask would be to not see Notify as a promotional service but as a Government of Canada essential service that operates under different rules.

### Cost of Short Codes

Short codes are very expensive. As of Sept 2021, it is 3000 USD to setup and a 1000 USD in recurring monthly costs. It would be cost prohibitive to get short codes per service that use Notify. Notify cannot take that cost on a per service basis.

Short codes also require paperwork and 10-16 weeks to get processed. We do not have a self serve option for Notify clients to pick whether they want a Short Code or not. We would have to create a process that would inform individual services about the cost of obtaining a short code, as well as a process for application and applying the Short Code to our service.

The short code usage is as following, compared to long code to provide a comparison:

|             | Long code | Short code |
|-------------|-----------|------------|
| Base price  | 0.00581   | 0.02183    |
| Carrier fee | 0.006     | 0.005      |

The cost is higher per usage so we would need to thoroughly vet for official federal services that really need high throughput and a trusted Short Code number. We would not offer the Short Code for federal services that send SMS to internal government employees, only to those federal services that send SMS to the public.

### Increase Throughput

Currently we have multiple phone numbers to get over the 1 sms/ 1 second rule that is enforced by AWS. We do not have another option for increasing throughput unless we apply for the Short Code. We would need to further dwell on a solution to this particular issue.

### Unsubscribe Option

The main problem that arises with short codes is that an individual might unsubscibe themselves from all notifications from the Canadian Government, vs the individual service they were interested in unsubscribing from.

This problem currently also exists with the long codes we use in Notify. If a user sends `STOP` to any of the long codes we have in the pool of non-dedicated long code for Notify in `ca-central-1`, the user unsubscribes themselves from all notifications from Notify that are set in `ca-central-1`.

We have dedicated long codes for Notify in `us-west-2`. `STOP` in this case will unsubscribe the individual from `all` dedicated long codes set in that region. This is because AWS has `one` opt-out list per AWS region.

We could send a shortened link to the user to try and get them to use the unsubscribe through the service vs 'STOP'. The unsubscribe list would be managed through the individual Notify services.

- Need to get a URL shortner that is Gov of Canada owned and used by multiple different departments. The URL shortner would be used to send the unsubscribe link in the SMS so every service could manage its own subscriptions.
- Need to build out functionality for managing subscriptions within the Notify Admin. There is currently work being done by another platform initiative regarding subscriptions, there might be an overlap of service functionality that could be used for notify subscription management.

## Potential Solutions

### Multiple Short Codes

Get multiple short codes - one per service. Currently, there are no Shared Short Codes in Canada. [USA allows customers to use 10DLC](https://messagemedia.com/us/blog/shared-short-code-replaced-with-10dlc/) but there isn't an equivalent in Canada atm. Unless we are willing to use the same short code for every client, we should instead get a short code per client.

### Toll free numbers

Instead of using short codes, we could opt for toll free numbers. Toll free numbers can have a throughput of 3 SMS/seconds and are more expensive than long codes that are 2 USD/month. Toll free numbers for SMS isn't setup in AWS and we would have to ask for it in a requirement document.

### Pool of Canadian numbers

Another option could be to buy a pool of 100 Canadian numbers (or required numbers). These comes at a cost of 1 USD / month / number, costing much less than a Short Code. We would get a much higher rate by rotating through our own numbers and would have total control over these. There would be an application logic overhead that we would need to write, such as a round-robin strategy with certain range of reserved numbers for service that require trust via dedicated long code.

We could host these either in the us-west-2 region or ca-central-1. It is worth to note that if we have dedicated region in an AWS region, we cannot use their random pool of numbers. At the moment, we have no dedicated numbers in ca-central-1 for that reason, falling back on AWS pool of long codes by default.

### One short code per service

This is an avenue where we could support a short code associated to one and only one service, if the latter is ready to cover the cost. Notify then could associated the short to the service and bill the service in question.

Notify has no support for billing at the current time although there is GDS code present in its source code to support it.

This option could be considered in the future for provincial or territorial government services who want their own Short Code.

## Decision

We consider going forward with filling in an application for a Short Code, considering that:

1. We can push forward our application by filing under the Government of Canada organization and provide the most used services that would be candidates for that application as templates in the request.
1. The request for a Short Code does not cost anything, as long as the request did not reach the telecoms yet (AWS -> aggregators -> telecoms).
1. The cutoff period for new request this year (2021) ends on October 28th. No new requests will be considered until new year. That means that if we do not request one in the upcoming days, it could take up to 6 months to get a short code (3 months to end of year + 3 months for the request processing).
1. The issue around the STOP keyword (and a much needed unsubscribe option) is one that we already have with our current setup and hence, short code will not make it worst (nor improve it).

## Update 2021

After discussions with AWS, we considered the following limitations to the short code program in Canada:

- **One short code for closely related use cases**: It is highly unlikely that telco carriers will approve one single short code  for all federal programs. Ideally, user cases sharing same short code are logically related, connected and target same subscriber-base. For example, ArriveCAN and Travel Advisory messages for travelers. It is recommended to highlight commonality of use cases sharing same short code in the application

- **It is recommended to include the following details in the application document**: Detailed description of opt-in process for each use case: screenshots, approval process, enforcement process SMS message templates: constant part  and variable parts of messages who does control and  fill-in the template for each use case (GCNotify team or GoC departments). This information is required by carriers to understand who is a contact person/team if quick updates is needed.

Given that there is a strong preference for one short code only for closely related use cases, and given that it is recommended to include detailed documentation for each use case, the financial and administrative costs at this time are too high for us to proceed with our application.

We will reconsider opening our file for a short code, or multiple shortcode if the need arises and the use case is a good fit for the program and parameters given by AWS, CWTA and the carriers.

## Update 2024

We revived the effort in 2023 due to our scaling need for SMS, coming as a requirement for getting provincial beta onboarding program within GCNotify.

A policy research was performed to dig into CASL legislation and see if that should apply to governmental bodies. The findings were that it should not. Considering this and after talks with AWS (who talked to aggregators), it was deemeed that it would be a safe strategy to go forward with a specialized use case for a new short code request. This would get us a foot in the door, while looking for options to upgrade our existing short code to a generic usage once we got it by trying to get in touch with the CWTA organization.

Hence, we decided to go forward with a short code specialized for 2FA use case, considering this is one of our most common use case among GCNotify's users and it makes up 50% of our SMS notification traffic. Working closely with product and the policy team, we filled out a request that provided our governmental policies and using example of GCNotify itself as a 2FA example.

In the meantime, we approched the CWTA organization and knocked at their door. We met with one of their representative to listen to our use case for a generic usage of our newly acquired short code that we recently acquired a week before (good timing!). At the time of this writing, we are in communication and hope we can get through to have a broader usage short code but nothing is guaranteed. This is a continuous and patient effort.

Ideally, our next steps would have us the upgraded generic usage short code, with a 3 letter code.

## Consequences

- On January 16th, 2024, we acquired our new short code.
- With our newly acquired short code (in 2024), we are able to send 100 SMS per second. This provides a potential of 6,000 SMS notifications per minute.
- This is limited to 2FA authentication usage though and these are less likely to see outburst of notifications which would max out the short code sending rate capacity.
- Short code acquisition triggered implementation of new features, covered in new ADR records.
