# Database upgrade

Date: 2022-12-13

## Status

**APPROVED**.

## Related ADRs

- [Upgrade GC Notify Postgres to Latest Major Version](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-adr/blob/main/records/2023-12-19.upgrade-database-major-version.md): supersedes this exploratory ADR as the implementation spec.

## Context

[Staging](https://ca-central-1.console.aws.amazon.com/rds/home?region=ca-central-1#database:id=notification-canada-ca-staging-cluster;is-cluster=true;tab=configuration) and
[production](https://ca-central-1.console.aws.amazon.com/rds/home?region=ca-central-1#database:id=notification-canada-ca-production-cluster;is-cluster=true;tab=configuration) are both running aurora-postgresql 11.13 (from 2021-08-12). The latest version of PostgreSQL available on AWS is 14.5. The latest version of PostgreSQL is 15.1.

AWS recommended that we upgrade to at least 11.16 by July 23, 2022.

## Options

According to [Upgrading the PostgreSQL DB engine for Amazon RDS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.html), we cannot go straight to 14.5. Our options are:

- 11.17
- 12, i.e. 12.8, 12.9, 12.10, 12.11, or 12.12
- 13.14 (AWS maximum recommended upgrade)

According to [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.html):

> ### Major version upgrades
>
> Major version upgrades can contain database changes that are not backward-compatible with existing applications. As a result, you must manually perform major version upgrades of your DB instances. You can initiate a major version upgrade by modifying your DB instance. However, before you perform a major version upgrade, we recommend that you follow the steps described in [Choosing a major version upgrade for PostgreSQL](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.html#USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.MajorVersion). During a major version upgrade, Amazon RDS also upgrades all of your in-Region read replicas along with the primary DB instance.
>
> **Minor version upgrades**
>
>In contrast, minor version upgrades include only changes that are backward-compatible with existing applications. You can initiate a minor version upgrade manually by modifying your DB instance. Or you can enable the Auto minor version upgrade option when creating or modifying a DB instance. Doing so means that your DB instance is automatically upgraded after Amazon RDS tests and approves the new version. If your PostgreSQL DB instance is using read replicas, you must first upgrade all of the read replicas before upgrading the primary instance. If your DB instance is in a Multi-AZ deployment, then the writer and any standby replicas are upgraded simultaneously. Therefore, your DB instance might not be available until the upgrade is complete. For more details, see [Automatic minor version upgrades for PostgreSQL](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.html#USER_UpgradeDBInstance.PostgreSQL.Minor). For information about manually performing a minor version upgrade, see [Manually upgrading the engine version](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/USER_UpgradeDBInstance.Upgrading.html#USER_UpgradeDBInstance.Upgrading.Manual).

### 11.17

Likely not risky.

### 12

There are [breaking changes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/release-12.html#id-1.11.6.18.4) from 11 to 12. Potential items that could be a concern are listed below.

> #### Change SQL-style substring() to have standard-compliant greediness behavior (Tom Lane)
>
> In cases where the pattern can be matched in more than one way, the initial sub-pattern is now treated as matching the least possible amount of text rather than the greatest; for example, a pattern such as %#"aa*#"% now selects the first group of a's from the input, not the last group.
>
> #### In new btree indexes, the maximum index entry length is reduced by eight bytes, to improve handling of duplicate entries (Peter Geoghegan)
>
> This means that a REINDEX operation on an index pg_upgrade'd from a previous release could potentially fail.

### 13.14

There are also [breaking changes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/release-13.html#id-1.11.6.14.4) from 12 to 13. Unknown if any affect us.

### 14

[Breaking changes are listed here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/release-14.html#id-1.11.6.16.5). Potential items that could be a concern are listed below.

> #### User-defined objects that reference certain built-in array functions along with their argument types must be recreated (Tom Lane)
>
> Specifically, array_append(), array_prepend(), array_cat(), array_position(), array_positions(), array_remove(), array_replace(), and width_bucket() used to take anyarray arguments but now take anycompatiblearray. Therefore, user-defined objects like aggregates and operators that reference those array function signatures must be dropped before upgrading, and recreated once the upgrade completes.
>
> #### Change EXTRACT() to return type numeric instead of float8 (Peter Eisentraut)
>
> This avoids loss-of-precision issues in some usages. The old behavior can still be obtained by using the old underlying function date_part().
>
> Also, EXTRACT(date) now throws an error for units that are not part of the date data type.
>
> #### Allow \D and \W shorthands to match newlines in regular expression newline-sensitive mode (Tom Lane)
>
> Previously they did not match newlines in this mode, but that disagrees with the behavior of other common regular expression engines. [^[:digit:]] or [^[:word:]] can be used to get the old behavior.
>
> #### Disregard constraints when matching regular expression back-references (Tom Lane)
>
> For example, in (^\d+).*\1, the ^ constraint should be applied at the start of the string, but not when matching \1.
>
> #### Disallow \w as a range start or end in regular expression character classes (Tom Lane)
>
> This previously was allowed but produced unexpected results.

### 15

[Breaking changes are listed here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/release-15.html).
Potential items that could be a concern are listed below.

> #### When interval input provides a fractional value for a unit greater than months, round to the nearest month (Bruce Momjian)
>
> For example, convert 1.99 years to 2 years, not 1 year 11 months as before.
>
> #### Mark the interval output function as stable, not immutable, since it depends on IntervalStyle (Tom Lane)
>
> This will, for example, cause creation of indexes relying on the text output of interval values to fail.
>
> #### Allow logical replication to run as the owner of the subscription (Mark Dilger)
>
> Because row-level security policies are not checked, only superusers, roles with `bypassrls`, and table owners can replicate into tables with row-level security policies.
>
> #### Prevent UPDATE and DELETE logical replication operations on tables where the subscription owner does not have SELECT permission on the table (Jeff Davis)
>
> UPDATE and DELETE commands typically involve reading the table as well, so require the subscription owner to have table SELECT permission.

## Upgrade approaches

From [Upgrade your Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL or Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL database, Part 1: Comparing upgrade approaches](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/database/part-1-upgrade-your-amazon-rds-for-postgresql-database-comparing-upgrade-approaches/) there are a few approaches we can use.

### Option A: In-place upgrade

This is in some ways the easiest, in that we essentially tell AWS to upgrade the database and it does it. The downside is that the database will be unavailable for most of the upgrade time, and hence Notify will be down. Also, if something goes wrong we would have to restore the database from a backup (and hope that works).

### Option B: Snapshot approach

In this approach, we would make a copy of the database and upgrade that copy, then switch the app to use the new database. The benefit is that if something doesn't work we can quickly switch back to the old database. This approach still requires downtime during the process though, since data added to the old database would not be in the new database.

### Option C: AWS DMS approach

We can use the AWS Database Migration Service. Here we create a new database with the new version, then turn on DMS. The old data will be copied into the new database. Also, any data added during this time will also be copied over. We then stop Notify, let any remaining data go to the new database, point Notify at the new database, and restart.
This is a fairly straightforward approach (as these things go) and will have less downtime than other methods. Note that DMS does not work with all data types or database configurations, so it might not be an option.

### Option D: Blue / Green migration

This is similar to Option C, but it has built-in support in AWS. AWS labels the original database "blue" and creates a copy labeled "green". New data will get copied to green. We then perform a switchover from blue to green. This approach requires us to first move to 11.21 and disable the RDS proxy.

### Option E: Replication-based approach using `pglogical`

This approach use the `pglogical` database extension along with database replication sets (a replication set is way to mark a collection of tables to be replicated.). In many ways this is very similar to Option C, however, in this case, once the new database is populated, it stays up-to-date faster and there is no "wait for last entries to transfer" downtime. Rather, we just have to turn off Notify, switch to the new database, and turn Notify back on (and then turn off the extension). There are restriction on what database configurations are acceptable, however, and this is a more manual process than using DMS.

### Discussion

We want to minimize downtime and maximize probability of success.

- There probably isn't too much to be gained performance-wise by just moving to 11.16, so we should move to 12.12 or 13.14. Just moving to 12.12 will increase the probability of success, at the expense of having to do another migration at a future point.
- Note that one benefit to just a minor upgrade would be that we could be confident that any issues that arise are due to our migration and not to the version change. So we could use a 11.16 upgrade as an opportunity to gain familiarity with the migration process.
- Option A is probably the worst on both scores.
- Option B give us the ability to quickly switch to the old database if things go wrong, but the downtime will be the same (likely a bit longer because we need to also take the snapshot).
- Options C, D and E probably have the same short downtime for us (if we do this on a Saturday evening, for example, there will not be may notifications sent during Option C's "wait for last entries to transfer" window)
- Option C may be less manual with better documentation and support. Both approaches require multiple manual steps however.

## Additional considerations

Aurora Serverless v2 might be an appropriate fit for Notify. In particular, it allows better up and down compute scaling for bursty usage, which is Notify's pattern. However, Serverless v2 only supports PostgreSQL 13.6 and above, so we would have to migrate up from our current 11.13 before moving to Serverless.

### Extensions

From `SELECT * FROM pg_extension;` we see that we are using extensions `plpgsql` and `pgcrypto` on staging and `plpgsql`, `pgcrypto` and `tablefunc` on production.

From [Extension versions for Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/PostgreSQLReleaseNotes/postgresql-extensions.html)

- `plpgsql`: same version (1.0) for all engine versions. No upgrade required.
- `pgcrypto`: same version (1.3) for all engine versions. No upgrade required.
- `tablefunc`: same version (1.0) for all engine versions. No upgrade required.

### Downtime

Depending on our approach this may require database downtime. If downtime is significant we should have a proper maintenance window where Notify admin displays a "Notify is unavailable" page and the API returns a "Notify is unavailable" error message.

### Terraform

Note that our [terraform](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform/blob/main/aws/rds/rds.tf#L72) sets the engine version to 11.9, but adds the engine version to the `ignore_changes` section. So we do not have to change our terraform to change the engine version.

However we have a custom [RDS cluster parameter group](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform/blob/main/aws/rds/rds.tf#L41) that is using `aurora-postgresql11` for the `family`. If we upgrade major versions this would need to be updated.

## Decision

After much discussion and testing we decided to proceed with Option D, the built in 🔵 / 🟢 migration.

## Consequences

The exploratory work on database upgrade led to the actual execution. The implementation details are described within the [Upgrade GC Notify Postgres to Latest Major Version](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-adr/blob/main/records/2023-12-19.upgrade-database-major-version.md) ADR centered around the plan and tests.
