# Lambda API environment variable configuration

Date: 2022-03-23

## Status

**In review.**

## Context

With the [API moving from Kubernetes to an AWS Lambda function](./2021-08-16.scalability.move-api-to-lambda.md), we now have a situation where the API's configuration is being managed in two different places:

- [Kubernetes manifests](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-manifests/), via the encrypted `.env` files and Kustomize; and
- [Terraform Lambda function configuration](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform/blob/main/aws/lambda-api/lambda.tf) using hardcoded values.

This is leading to duplication of effort and a lack of consistency between the Kubernetes and Lambda API configuration as we're relying on a manual process to make changes when environment variables are updated.

## Proposed solution

Update the Lambda API's environment variable configuration to use the existing encrypted `.env` files as its source of values.  This would remove the duplicated effort in changing environment variables and keep the Kubernetes and Lambda API configuration in sync.

This would be accomplished as follows:

1. Create an [AWS Systems Manager Parameter Store](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/systems-manager-parameter-store.html) that contains the [notification-manifests](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-manifests/) `.env` file contents for Staging and Production.
1. Update the Lambda API to load environment variables from this Parameter Store each time it is cold started.  As part of this update, only non-existent environment variables would be loaded into the Lambda API's execution context.  This would allow the [Terraform `environment` configuration block](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform/blob/27d8614/aws/lambda-api/lambda.tf#L23) to take precedence and override environment variables as-needed.
1. Every time a change is made to the Staging or Production encrypted `.env` files, a GitHub workflow will trigger to update the Parameter Store with the new environment variable values and re-deploy the Lambda API to load these new values.

## Testing

The Kubernetes and Lambda API startup configuration logging added by [cds-snc/notification-api#1501](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-api/pull/1501) will be compared after the change to ensure all config items have the expected values.


## Additional considerations

1. Going forward, we need to evaluate if using an encrypted `.env` file is still the best way to configure Notify services. It makes sense in the context of Kubernetes manifests and Kustomize builds, but as services begin to move out of Kubernetes, it will create complexity and cross-dependencies.
1. For disaster recovery (DR), the [notification-terraform repo](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform) will no longer be able to create a fully standalone environment.  This is because the Lambda API will have a dependency on an AWS Systems Manager Parameter Store existing in the target AWS account, pre-populated with the correct `.env` values.  This can be mitigated by updated the DR documentation.