# Improve Notify service configuration reliability

Date: 2022-04-07

## Status

**In review.**

## Context

The Notify API, Admin and Document Download API are configured using environment variables.  These environment variables are stored in encrypted `.env` files and Kubernetes manifests.  Overtime, misconfigurations have occurred because of inconsistencies in how the String values of the environment variables are converted to Boolean and Integer values.  

The goal of this solution is to improve the reliability of service configuration by consistently setting configuration values across services and logging the service configuration when it starts so that it can be validated. 

## Proposed solution

There are two proposed solutions for this ADR.

### Log configuration on service startup

Update the Notify API, Admin and Document Download API to log their configuration values on startup. This will allow us to validate that the running services have the expected configuration values. Sensitive values will be redacted in the logs to prevent accidental exposure.

### Use `environs` Python package

Update the Notify API, Admin and Document Download API to use the [`environs` Python package](https://pypi.org/project/environs/) to load Boolean and Integer configuration values. By using `environs` we will be able to take advantage of its `env.bool` and `env.int` functions to consistently load configuration values with default fallbacks. Currently there are multiple different ways being used to coerce String configuration values into Booleans and Integers, which is leading to mis-configuation.

## Testing

The logged output from the Notify services will be compared with the expected values in the encrypted `.env` files and Kubernetes manifests.

## Outcomes

It is expected we will see the following with the proposed solutions:

- [ ] Fewer incidents caused by misconfigurations of the Notify services.
- [ ] A higher degree of confidence in the configuration values of the Notify services.

## Additional considerations

This proposal is related to the work being done in the following issues:
- [cds-snc/notification-planning#421](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-planning/issues/421)
- [cds-snc/notification-planning#503](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-planning/issues/503)
- [cds-snc/notification-planning#504](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-planning/issues/504)