# Prefixing of API tokens

Date: 2022-07-20

## Status

**DRAFT**

## Context

The mishandling of application secrets has lead to many security incidents in companies big and small. Given the inherent risk in how users store these secrets, it is important that we provide mechanisms to protect our users from doing so improperly.  Taking a cue from [Github](https://github.blog/2021-04-05-behind-githubs-new-authentication-token-formats/), [Slack](https://api.slack.com/authentication/token-types), and [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/api/authentication), we see that token prefixes are an effective technique to help us ensure our tokens don't end up in public repositories.

By combining a known prefix with initiatives such as Github's [secret scanning program](https://docs.github.com/en/developers/overview/secret-scanning-partner-program), we can be alerted if one of our users mistakenly stores their API keys in the open.

## Implementation steps

- Add a known prefix to our API keys in order to be able to easily identify them
- Register with Github's secret scanning program and create an endpoint for them to report issues back to us
- Give users a grace period to generate new keys
  - After grace period, enforce a rule that ensures all API keys contain our prefix

### Old API key deprecation process

In order to deprecate old keys each user must be contacted to let them know they need to regenerate their keys and update their applications.  Until all users have regenerated their API keys, we can't start enforcing the existence of the prefix

#### Process outline
1. Contact clients with non-prefixed keys (based on key creation date); give them a deadline (TBD) and instructions on how to re-generate their API keys
1. After deadline, re-check how many users still haven't re-generated their keys and contact a second time
1. When all users have re-generated, or we are satisfied with the percentage of users who have, implement prefix checking in the API.


## Implementation notes
- API keys are stored in the table `api_keys`
- API keys are stored using a name the user chooses (`name`) and a secret that we generate (`secret`)
- We can store the new keys the same way without changing any database fields.
- No changes are required to support old keys; instead, old keys will stop being supported as soon as we add validation to ensure keys contain our prefix. API ignores everything but the right-most characters of an API key.  This will need to be updated in order to verify the existence of the prefix.

## Additional considerations

### Client libraries
Any changes to the API keys must be tested in all of the client libraries we support:
- Java
- .NET
- NodeJS
- PHP
- Python
- Ruby

### Other open source platforms
There are other open source platforms we may wish to monitor for keys as well, including, but not limited to:
- GitLab
- Bitbucket
- Gitea
- Google Cloud Source Repositories

## Decision

_TODO: Describe the way forward._

## Consequences

_TODO: Describe foreseen and felt consequences of the decision (possible after 1-3 months)._
