# International SMS restrictions

Date: 2023-02-06

## Status

**DRAFT**.

## Context

The goal of GCNotify is to send international SMS messages to different countries. However, in order to ensure successful delivery of these messages, it is necessary to comply with regulations in each country. Some countries require registrations for different types of origination IDs (long code, short code, 10DLC, sender ID) prior to use these.

## SMS Lingo

This section defines words that are often mentioned in the SMS world.  tried to stick with the nearest AWS definitions in case where there might be conflicting information, as this is the main provider that we are using at this time.

### Origination identities

AWS regroups all mechanisms to identify an incoming SMS under the term _origination identities_. There are two subtypes afterward: sender ID and origination numbers. The former is mostly known for its alphanumeric ability to uniquely identify a sender (supposedly -- it depends of local legislation) and the latter is related to numeric phone numbers that we are used to.

### Origination numbers

These are composed of:

* **Long code**: 10-digit number to send messages; low volume and seen as trustworthy, unless dedicated.
* **Short code**: 4-6 digits to send high volume message from a unique trustworthy number.
* **Toll free numbers**: 10 digit number to send transactional message.
* **10DLC**: 10 digit number solely meant for application to person messages.

### Sender ID

A sender ID is a custom word that helps identify the origination. Sender ID can be a custom word or even a number. These can even be shared in some legislation. [This article](https://www.smsglobal.com/blog/sender-ids-explained/) has a good summarized breakdown of what these are. A sender ID is considered an origination ID just like long code and short code on AWS perspectives. When you register for one, you don't need an accompanying number: it is by itself an identity that can track to an origin.

## Type of restrictions

There are a few approaches and concerns for handling international SMS. This section will cover a few for introductory purpose.

### Registrations

Many legislations require to register the following, mostly to reduce spam and frauds. The registration process ranges from a simple identification of the sender to a fully fledged process along with expensive payment.

* Sender IDs
* Toll free number
* Short codes
* 10DLC

### Opt-in and opt-out measures for recipients

Many legislations require measures for services to ask users to first opt-in before sending either promotional or transaction messages. It varies per country and the used origination ID usually makes a difference, e.g.short codes are considered more trustworthy (hence likely to be scammed if no legislation).

### Content based

Many legislations require to leave the origination name in the message or the mechanism on unsubscribing from the distribution list.

### Channel based

Recommendations or enforcements of marketing and transactional messages sent through proper channel might be performed, i.e. to send promotional messages only via short code (like New Zealand).

## Restrictions by destination

Considering previous references and concerns, we have the following options to continue further sending SMS (or not), depending on the target country destinations.

### New Zealand

#### Requirements

Sending SMS requires the following:

* It is compulsory to include your business/brand name and contact details in the message. **Example**: _ABC Sportswear: Come into the store this Friday for 50% off all stock for members. Make sure you bring your membership cards. Reply STOP to opt-out or ph 0800XXXX._
* A functioning opt-out via text message must be provided at the end of all marketing messages. **Example**: _ABC Sportswear: Come into the store this Friday for 50% off all stock for members. Make sure you bring your membership cards. Reply STOP to opt-out or ph 0800XXXX._
* Any marketing/promotional messages must be sent from a zero-rated short code so recipients can reply with an opt-out that's free of charge, irrespective of standard-rated codes that have been used for previous outbound notifications.
* Other messages from a normal rated short code, where replies will incur a charge, should let the recipient know e.g.  “Replies will incur a cost”.
* All messages must comply with NZ Privacy and SPAM legislation. The Department of Internal Affairs website has lots of information on electronic messaging compliance and SPAM.
* The use of Alphanumeric headers (AN) for SMS is not permitted in NZ as it is not possible to get replies back, which means phone users are not able to opt out by replying STOP.
* A shortcode which is a 3 or 4 digit code is permitted to send Application to Person (a2p) SMS in NZ. The use of Long Code (LC) is not permitted either.
* A dedicated shortcode is required for sending SMS into NZ especially, for Marketing Campaigns.
* Shared shortcodes are not permitted in New Zealand. Hence it is best to use a dedicated shortcode for each service.

#### Governing bodies

The [New Zealand Telecommunications Forum (TCF)](https://www.tcf.org.nz/consumers/) is a member organisation, representing the majority of telecommunications providers in New Zealand (over 95% by revenue share).

#### Legislations

* [Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act 2007](https://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2007/0007/latest/whole.html) by the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment
* [Mobile Messaging Services Code
2021](https://www.tcf.org.nz/industry/standards-compliance/mobile-phone-services/messaging-services/tcf-mobile-messaging-services-code-november-2021.pdf) by the TCF

#### Options

_To be determined._

#### Consequences

_To be determined._

### Singapore

#### Guidelines

* [Twilio guidelines](https://www.twilio.com/guidelines/sg/sms)
* Sender IDs need to be registered. Only registered Sender IDs will reach Singapore users, and non-registered Sender IDs will be channeled to a Sender ID bearing the name “Likely-SCAM” for a transitionary period of around 6 months (till the end of July 2023). After this transitionary period, these SMS will be blocked.

#### Governing bodies

* [Infocomm Media Development Authority](https://www.imda.gov.sg/)

#### Legislations

* [PROPOSALS TO STRENGTHEN SAFEGUARDS FOR SMS MESSAGES TO
SINGAPORE USERS: FULL SMS SENDER ID REGISTRY REGIME](https://www.imda.gov.sg/-/media/Imda/Files/Regulations-and-Licensing/Regulations/Consultations/2022/Proposals-to-Strengthen-Safeguards-for-SMS-Messages-to-Singapore-Users/Full-SSIR-Regime/IMDA-Decision-on-Full-SSIR-Regime.pdf)

#### Options

##### 1) Do not register sender ID with Singapore authorities

Because the Singapore legislation only targets sender IDs, the international SMS that GCNotify sends using long code would not be affected. An AWS ticket was raised with an SMS specialist and he confirmed that it should still work.

There should be monitoring checks done after January 31th, 2023 to make sure that SMS are still sent to this destination.

##### 2) Register sender ID with Singapore authorities

This is a high effort option that is not worth it at this time. This requires registration of a company or organization with the Singapore government and then registration of the sender ID. Summarized steps are as follow:

> From 31 October 2022, you may reserve your Sender IDs via the SSIR portal on a first-come-first-served basis.
> You will first need to create an account in the portal before you can log-in to reserve your preferred Sender IDs. Before you create your account, please ensure that you have the following information ready:
>
> 1. Organisation’s registered name (based on ACRA), registered address & Unique Entity Number;
> 1. Full name, contact number & email address of the person designated as your organisation’s Admin account holder in the portal. The Admin account holder in the portal will be able to create other User accounts for your organisation;
> 1. List of participating SMS aggregators that your organisation works with to deliver your SMS messages. You will need to ensure that the aggregators you work with are participating in the SSIR. You can check the list here.
> 1. List of Sender IDs you intend to reserve for your organisation; and
> 1. Organisation’s Corppass for company verification purposes. If you do not have Corppass, SSIR may require your organisation’s utility bills or telecom bills.
>
> There will be a one-time setup fee of S$500 for each registered organisation, and an annual charge of S$200 for each registered Sender ID. Prices are listed before prevailing Goods & Services Tax.  

#### Decision

Option 1 with constant monitoring is the GCNotify's team decision as this is basically the status quo for us if everything works fine as before.

#### Consequences

_To be determined._

## SMS destination countries to monitor

Most SMS are sent successfully by GCNotify at the international level to locations with a few exceptions described in the table below. These are the locations we need to write down about in this document.

| Country     | Sent | Failed | Delivery rate |
|-------------|-----:|-------:|--------------:|
| New Zealand |    6 |      6 |            0% |

At the time of this writing, albeit a minuscule sample, New Zealand seems to be problematic. Let's check future reports to check if that is still a problem.

## SMS current registrations

Current registrations that GCNotify performed are to be listed in the following table.

| Country       | Type             | Registered | Task                                                                                                                           |
|---------------|------------------|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| United-States | Toll free number | Yes        | [#794](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/notify-planning-614b3ad91bc2030015ed22f5/issues/gh/cds-snc/notification-planning/794) |

## Outcome

Registering the numbers we use to send SMS is important to keep our sending capacity at the international level healthy, especially for most popular target destination such as the United States. There is a need to monitor new legislations coming our way from different countries and balance the required effort and ability to send to these. So far, as far we as know, we can send to most destinations we deemed important. It is important to constantly monitor regions with high rate of failure (see section **Locations to monitor** in this document).

## References

* [Twilio / Phone Number Regulations](https://www.twilio.com/guidelines/regulatory)
* [Twilio / International support for Alphanumeric Sender ID](https://support.twilio.com/hc/en-us/articles/223133767-International-support-for-Alphanumeric-Sender-ID)
* [SMS.to / International SMS Sender ID regulations and requirements (list of countries)](https://support.sms.to/support/solutions/articles/43000562659-international-sms-sender-id-regulations-and-requirements-list-of-countries-)
* [AWS / Origination identities for SMS messages](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sns/latest/dg/channels-sms-originating-identities.html)
