# Secret Management Options Analysis

Date: 2023-03-28

## Status

**DRAFT**.

## Context

Currently, secret management is done in several different places depending on the part of the solution. This includes encrypted zip files stored along with the code in GitHub. This is not best practice, and has caused issues with secret rollovers. We are investigating alternative methods to manage secrets that put all secrets in one centrally managed location. 

## Restrictions

As a Government of Canada entity, we have certain policy and technical restrictions that we must adhere to in order to remain compliant with GoC standards.

* Data Residency - Data must be stored in a Canadian datacentre
* Non Public Deployments - Private links must be able to be configured for secure communication between services
* [ITSG-22](https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2019/cstc-csec/D96-8-22-2013-eng.pdf) and [ITSG-33](https://www.cyber.gc.ca/en/guidance/it-security-risk-management-lifecycle-approach-itsg-33) security compliance
* Government Procurement standards and availability

## Options

### HashiCorp Vault SaaS
[HashiCorp Vault](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault) is an industry standard, cloud agnostic secret management tool. It has integrations with all major cloud providers, platform offerings (Kubernetes/OpenShift), as well as a generic API. There is a SaaS version that has the infrastructure and application patching managed by HashiCorp.

### HashiCorp Vault Self Hosted
[HashiCorp Vault](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault) is an industry standard, cloud agnostic secret management tool. It has integrations with all major cloud providers, platform offerings (Kubernetes/OpenShift), as well as a generic API. There is an open source version that can be self hosted within a Kubernetes Cluster. 

### AWS Secrets Manager
[AWS Secrets Manager](https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager) is a first-party AWS offering that integrates natively with AWS resources, and can be implemented within Kubernetes using a CSI Driver. It is built specifically to manage secrets within AWS.

### AWS Parameter Store
[AWS Parameter Store](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/systems-manager-parameter-store.html) is a first-party AWS offering that integrates natively with AWS resources, and can be implemented within Kubernetes using a CSI Driver. It is built to manage parameters within AWS but is encrypted and could theoretically be used to manage secrets as well.

## Features Comparison

|                     | Fine Grained RBAC | Multiple Secret Stores | Multiple Secret  Backends | Automatic Secret Rotation | Just In Time Authentication | Cloud Agnostic | Managed Service | Private Connection Required | License Cost | People-Time Cost | Infrastructure Cost | Potential Risks | 
|---------------------|-------------------|------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------|----------------|-----------------|--------------|--------------|------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| HCP Vault           | Yes               | Yes                    | Yes                       | Yes                       | Yes                         | Yes            | Yes             | Yes          | ~ $20k/Year  | Low              | Included w/ License | Procurement, Notify would not be the owners, Third party data breaches |
| Self Hosted Vault   | Yes               | Yes                    | Yes                       | Yes                       | Yes                         | Yes            | No              | No           | Free         | High             | Medium              | In house knowledge and operational costs, would take time and cost investment to make truly HA| 
| AWS Secrets Manager | Yes               | No (One per account)   | No                        | Yes                       | No                          | No             | Yes             | No           | Free         | Medium           | Low                 | Tied in to AWS, not cloud portable, third party databareaches, not extensible enough | 
| AWS Parameter Store | Yes               | No (One per account)   | No                        | No                        | No                          | No             | Yes             | No           | Free         | Medium           | Free                | Tied in to AWS, not cloud portable, third party databareaches |

## Additional considerations

### Vault - Common

#### Kubernetes Integration

[Kubernetes Integration is done via the vault secret injector combined with the vault sidecar.](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/tutorials/kubernetes/kubernetes-external-vault)

The secret injector is scoped to a service account within kubernetes, and creates a JWT token that is used to authenticate with Vault. The sidecar is a container that runs in parallel with the target pod (e.g. admin or api). The sidecar periodically checks Vault for updates to the secrets and automatically injects the secrets into the target pod. When the secret is updated, the pod does not need to be refreshed, however the code must be written in such a way that it will automatically check for new values for this to be effective. The integration will require modifications to the Kustomize (or Helm) deployment for each application that needs to use it. These modifications are referenced just once. 


#### AWS First Party Services Integration

[AWS Lamba Integration is done via the Vault Lambda extension.](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/tutorials/app-integration/aws-lambda)

The vault lambda extension must be added to the target code application and deployed within the docker image. Additional logic must be added to the container to actually call vault and leverage the secrets. The extension works by assuming a specific AWS IAM role, and using that to authenticate against Vault. The set up for this is rather complex and convoluted as it requires Vault to also use aws as an authentication back end (So vault authenticates against aws, and aws authenticates against vault). This can (and should) be configured through terraform, and thus once it is done, it will be easy to make changes and run against new environmments. As with Kubernetes, the secret can be updated in vault and it will automatically propagate to the function. **To be confirmed**


#### General Secret Management

Once vault is configured, secret management is very flexible and straight forward. Vault uses the concept of "Secret Engines" to organize secrets. A Secret Engine can be thought of as the "root" organizational structure for a specific application. For example, the Secret Engine could be named "Notification-Production". Within this secrets engine, many "Secrets" can be created. It should be noted that in Vault, the term secret does not refer to a single key/value pair, but a collection of key value pairs. As an example, within the Notification-Production Secret Engine, a Secret could be named "API". This "API" secret would contain **all** key value pairs for the API. 

There are multiple types of Secret Engines. These types typically dictate where the secrets are stored. The default secret engine is a V2 KeyVault which hosts the data within the Vault instance. This is usually sufficient, however it is possible to leverage other Secret Engines, and Vault has Secret Engines that leverage AWS Secrets Manager, and Azure Key Vault as the back end storage repositoroes. Further investigation could be done to see if integrating Vault with AWS Secrets Manager provides the best of both worlds for Notify. 

Secrets and secret key value pairs can also be configured to perform Just In Time (JIT) authentication. In this scenario, when an application needs access to a specific resource, it will make a call to vault and request a JIT token which will have a very short TTL, creating what is essentially a one time use key. This is highly beneficial for security but requires considerable set up, and may have performance impacts. That being said, it is something worth investigating in the future. 

#### IAM 

Vault IAM is similar to AWS IAM, which is to say (unfortunately) that it can be rather complex. Vault identifies user and system accounts as "Entities". These entities are identified as a GUID, making it difficult at a glance to see exactly what an entity is. For this reason, Vault ties a secondary identification method to these entities called "Aliases". Typically the alias of an entity is the display name of a user or system account. Unfortunately, in most IAM scenarios it is not possible to administer an entity based on its alias. Instead once the entity is found by the alias, it is required to make note of the entity guid to manage it.

A positive of vault is that it is very flexible in the authentication methods that can be used. The default vault root administrator will use temporary token authentication, but this is not the recommended approach for day to day use. Instead, authentication can be done via standard username/password, OIDC login to an external IDP (GitHub etc), AWS account delegation, Kubernetes, and more. This makes it very easy to integrate virtually any system within vault. Vault uses the concept of roles that are assigned to an authentication method. The role is a group of policies and permissions that can be assigned to a user who authenticates with this auth method. There will be a default role that will be assigned to the auth method, but additional roles can be specified and requested during login.

Vault uses policies for permission management. A policy is a JSON structured document that defines the permissions to the individual secret engines. Policies use keywords such as "Read","Write" and "List" to define how an entity is permitted to interact with a specific secret engine. These policies can be signed directly to an entity, or assigned to a group (which is a group of entities), or assigned to a role (which is a collection of policies and groups). 

### Vault - Self Hosted (Kubernetes)

#### Cost

Self hosting vault is free from a licensing perspective. There will be a minor additional cost on compute resources within the Kubernetes cluster, however Vault is not typically resource intensive from a compute perspective.

#### Administration Overhead

Vault can be installed in Kubernetes using the Vault Helm chart. This very quickly and easily sets up and configures vault within the Kubernetes cluster. The issue with self-hosted vault is always with Day 2 operations. As a best practice, in a production environment, Vault should be configured in High Availability mode which requires additional configuration. Since the secret engine data resides within the Kubernetes cluster, an automated backup tool such as Velero will be required to ensure that data is protected. If a vault pod is moved from one K8s node to another, the vault will automatically seal itself requiring either manual intervention to unseal, or the implementation of the vault auto-unseal operator. All of this is on top of the day to day IAM administration. Because of this, self hosted vault should only be considered if there are requirements that can not be met via HCP Vault (data residency, private links, cost etc).

### Vault - HCP SaaS

#### Caveats

HCP Vault provides managed offerings but even the highest tier of managed offerings does not provide all features and functionality of self hosted. The following are not available in managed offerings:

Policy:
- GCP Cloud KMS auto-unseal
- Format preserving encryption
- KMIP
- [Data masking](https://medium.com/hashicorp-engineering/advanced-data-protection-with-hashicorp-vault-96839b6b22af)
- Key management secret engine
- Tokenization

Reliability:
- Disaster recovery replication
- Lease count quotas

Governance:
- FIPS-140-2 & seal wrap
- Entropy augmentation
- Control groups
- HSM auto-unseal

Integration with first party services such as RDS is **not** supported for HCP vault. This can be mitigated by using github actions to read from vault to inject the secrets at deployment time.

#### Cost

[There are different pricing tiers for HCP Vault based on operational requiremments.](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault/pricing) The highest tier of HCP Vault would cost approximately $22k CAD per year. This cost could be split across the entirety of CDS and create a unified secret management platform. 

#### Administration Overhead

The administration overhead of HCP vault is less than that of self hosted vault. Only day to day IAM administration is required.

### AWS Secrets Manager

#### Kubernetes Integration

[Kubernetes integration is done using the AWS Secrets and Configuration Provider (ASCP) for the Kubrenetes Secrets Store CSI Driver.](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/latest/userguide/integrating_csi_driver.html) **NOTE: Fargate is not supported for this**

These can be installed via Helm. Each deployment will require a service account linked to the AWS role (can be done via helm/kustomize). The CSI Secret provider does not run as a sidecar like vault does - instead it is baked directly into Kubernetes. The Secret Store CSI driver does not currently support autommatic syncronization (this is in alpha state right now). In order to update the secrets after changing them in the secret manager, the deployment must be restarted using kubectl rollout restart deployment/deployment-name.

#### AWS First Party Services Integration

[AWS offers a lambda layer that can be added to the target application.](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/latest/userguide/retrieving-secrets_lambda.html) The lambda layer will automatically stand up a server within the lambda function that can be called to fetch the secrets. At launch, the server caches the secrets. Additional IAM configuration is required to allow the lambda function to read secrets from the secret manager, which can be done via Terraform. The authentication to the secret store server is done via a Lambda session token which is natively injected in the instance. Integration with AWS RDS and other first party services can be native to the secret manager, and even offers the ability to automatically roll over secrets for select services.

#### General Secret Management

Secret management with AWS Secrets Manager has fewer options than Vault but is still versatile enough. Where Vault is a swiss army knife of secrets, Secrets Manager is much more basic in functionality. This is beneficial to gaining knowledge of how to manage secrets, but may prove to be restrictive in what can be done. AWS scopes the Secret Manager to the AWS account that its running in and secrets are administered using the AWS management console GUI. Secrets are organized at a single level, but can incorporate forward slashes to give an approximate equivalent to Vault's organizational structure. For example, a secret could be called notify-api/scratch/database-password. 

#### Cost

AWS Secrets manager has a modest cost associated to it at $0.40USD per secret per month plus $0.05 per 10,000 API calls. With the existing secrets within AWS for notify, the cost would be less than $50 per month. 

#### Administration Overhead

There is little administration overhead on a day to day basis, but there is an important note to make regarding disaster recovery using AWS Secrets Manager. First, since the secrets manager is tied to AWS directly, it will be more difficult to create an environmment from scratch against a new account. Secrets would have to be added manually via clickops before terraform implementation. Second, since this is a first party solution, additional complexity would be added when attempting to migrate to another cloud service provider. 

#### IAM 

Secret Manager IAM follows the same momdel as AWS. Access to secrets can be scoped down to individual secrets, but this requires a large amount of IAM code. Every time a new secret is added, a terraform pull request must occur to update the IAM configuration to ensure the lambda function can retrieve this. 

### AWS Parameter Store

#### Kubernetes Integration

Kubernetes integration is identical to AWS Secrets Manager with the exception of the resource name on the permissions for the IAM.

#### AWS First Party Services Integration

First Party integration is identical to AWS Secrets Manager with the exception of the resource name on the permissions for the IAM.

#### General Secret Management

AWS Parameter store is virtually identical to the secrets manager in terms of encryption and organization, but it does not offer thing such as automatic secret rotation. 

#### IAM 

Parameter Store IAM follows the same momdel as AWS. Access to secrets can be scoped down to individual secrets, but this requires a large amount of IAM code. Every time a new secret is added, a terraform pull request must occur to update the IAM configuration to ensure the lambda function can retrieve this. 

#### Cost

There is no cost associated with using the Parameter Store.

#### Administration Overhead

As with the secrets manager, there is little day to day administration overhead. Because there is no automatic secret rotation, secret rollovers would be manual and incur periodic development costs.

## Decision

After demonstrating both Vault and AWS SSM/Parameters to the Notify team as well as CDS SRE team, a tentative decision has been made to proceed with provisioning HCP Vault (SaaS) for the platforms side of CDS. Initial thoughts are that this should be managed by the CDS Platforms SRE team, and Notify will be a user of this service. Ben and Calvin will meet to discuss further next steps. 

### Decision Rationale

#### Pros
* Vault is cloud and system agnostic, and can integrate with virtually everything
* Vault is an industry standard
* Vault provides the opportunity for the platform SRE team to dictate a standardized path for secret management across all teams in platform
* HCP SaaS Vault is separate from the Notify/CDS infrastructure and thus can be leveraged as a "secret 0" solution
* HCP SaaS Vault is able to be deployed in both AWS and Azure and can thus be leveraged for certain BCP scenarios
* Vault versioning and auditing is more advanced than AWS SSM

#### Cons
* HCP SaaS Vault is comparatively more expensive than other solutions
* Self Hosted Vault was considered to be too much of a time investment


## Consequences

_TODO: Describe foreseen and felt consequences of the decision (possible after 1-3 months)._
