# Malicious Content Scanning

Date: 2023-01-24

## Status

**DRAFT**.

_VALUES: (DRAFT, IN REVIEW, APPROVED, REJECTED)_

## Context

We are working on detecting malicious content in attached files, as described in [this issue card](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/notify-planning-614b3ad91bc2030015ed22f5/issues/gh/cds-snc/notification-planning/725). This is part of a larger effort to detect realtime misuse of Notify, which was a recommendation from a recent security audit.

The SRE team has created the [scan-files](https://github.com/cds-snc/scan-files) project, which is a tool to help platform products scan files for malicious content. It includes terraform for [S3 scan object](https://github.com/cds-snc/scan-files/tree/main/module/s3-scan-object), which is sets up a lambda function that watches a given S3 bucket and scans each new file. The scan verdict is then written as a tag to the S3 object, and can be read when the S3 object is accessed.

We have [tried getting the S3 scan object lambda function to run on our S3 bucket](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-terraform/pull/600), but that did not work because we are using a different encryption key for each file in S3. This is because we deliver links from dd-api as a proxy to our S3 bucket. We require that the user downloading the file knows both the UUID for the file and the encryption key to prevent download of files they should not have access to.

We are now calling the scan-files api directly from the Document Download API ([Draft PR](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-document-download-api/pull/97)). This API can take a few seconds to return a response, and this time increases as file size increases. So we need to stop this from causing delaying the response when a user makes a requests to the Notify API.  

We have explored using the `asyncio` library in python to create a new process to call the scan-files api [here](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-document-download-api/pull/97/files#diff-a842b15bd72bea41437e64bda92d12262c8eca35af7e8adf111bd520fe7c3010R1). Then once the result is returned, we could write that result to the S3 object as a tag which can be read later. However, this approach did not work to reduce the response time for the Document Download API.

It seems that it is [not possible to create background processes inside flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.2.x/async-await/#background-tasks).

## Options

Here are some of the options for scanning email attachments with the scan-files project.

### Duplicate S3 bucket

The scan-files project comes with a terraform module that triggers a scan of newly created S3 objects in a bucket it is told to watch. The S3 bucket we are currently using to store file attachments won't work, since these file are each encrypted with a unique key and the scan-files tf module does not support this. So, we could create a 2nd S3 bucket with restricted access containing duplicates of these files, all encrypted with the same key.

Mapping files from one S3 bucket to the other is simple - we can just use the same file name in both cases. We would need to enforce retention/deletion policies in the duplicate bucket that are at least as strict. And the duplicate S3 bucket can have an access policy that restricts access to the document-download API and scan-files.

We only need to store the duplicate files until the malware scan is complete and the scan verdict is read by notification-api prior to sending the email and file attachment (either in linked or attached directly).

### Migrate Document Download API from Flask to Quart

Flask does not have good async support, and [they suggest using Quart for better async support](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.2.x/async-await/#when-to-use-quart-instead). 

It does seem like Quart [adds support for background tasks](https://quart.palletsprojects.com/en/latest/how_to_guides/background_tasks.html) and would solve our problem.

It seems like migrating from Flask to [Quart](https://github.com/pallets/quart) is not very difficult (see [quart docs](https://quart.palletsprojects.com/en/latest/how_to_guides/flask_migration.html)).

Update: We tried using Quart and it introduced some compatibility problems with [notification-utils](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-utils).


### Use a background thread in Flask to call the scan-files API directly

It is possible to use the `threading` library to implement a new thread that can call the scan-files API directly. We implemented a proof of concept of that here: https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-document-download-api/pull/97.

However, we would need to do a significant amount of testing to determine the performance and reliability of this solution.

### Implement a new queue in Document Download API to start background tasks

Use Celery to store a queue of tasks to query the scan-files API and add a tag with the scan verdict to the S3 object. One downside of this is that it would introduce more complexity to the document download api, since Celery is not set up there yet.

### Create a new api/lambda function to perform the task 

Another possibility? T

## Additional considerations

_TODO: Describe extras in here._

## Decision

_TODO: Describe the way forward._

## Consequences

_TODO: Describe foreseen and felt consequences of the decision (possible after 1-3 months)._
