# Grouping SMS codes

Date: 2024-02-13

## Status

**APPRROVED**.

## Related ADRs

- [Add a short-code to Notify](https://github.com/cds-snc/notification-adr/blob/main/records/2021-09-20.scalibility.notify-short-code.md)

## Context

As the GCNotify team just acquired a short code and because it it currently
restricted to two-factor authentication only, the software needs a mechanism
to associate it only with templates of 2FA nature, i.e. the short code meant
to send 2FA should be used to send 2FA SMS.

At the current time, because the short code is sitting along long codes and all
of these are in a default pool, that means that all codes are randomly used to
send SMS, including the short codes. Hence the latter can be used to send
SMS messages that are non-related with 2FA.

To overcome this issue:

- we need to isolate the short code and long codes within their own group that will be identified with proper usage,
- we need a way to identify the templates with two-factor authentication.

The ability to create a group of codes has extra benefits that we can leverage
on top of solving the current issue:

- the ability to have a formal random pool of long codes,
- the ability to assign multiple dedicated long codes to one service,
- the ability to repatriate the existing dedicated long codes from the us-west-1 region into the ca-central-1 and align better with our own policies of sending from Canada exclusively.

### Overhaul of SMS sending

This fits into our vision for a general overhaul of how we send SMS. The
following areas along with broad tasks are envisioned at the time of this
writing:

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((short code))
    Manage keywords
    ::icon(fa-solid fa-key)
        Identify replied service
        Manage internal service block lists
            Store block list per service
            Report on the block list per service
            Remove number from block list
    Associate 2FA with templates
    ::icon(fa-solid fa-link)
        Provide usage on template form
        ::icon(fa-brands fa-wpforms)
        Identify existing 2FA template
        ::icon(fa-solid fa-magnifying-glass)
    Sending 2FA
    ::icon(fa fa-comment-sms)
        Update logic for original numbers
        ::icon(fa-solid fa-code)
            Fetch code with template
            Fetch code with service
            Fallback to default pool
        Send SMS through Pinpoint
        Create pool for short code
    Repatriate dedicated codes to Canada
    ::icon(fa-brands fa-canadian-maple-leaf)
        Create pool for existing services with dedicated code
        Auto pool creation on code assignment
        Auto pool destruction on code removal
```

## Options

Below are the different options that are considered to group SMS codes
together.

### Option 1: Leverage AWS Pinpoint pools

Create a phone pool in AWS Pinpoint for regular long codes which act as a
fallback. Create a pool containing the short code. Resurrect the Pinpoint
implementation to send SMS and leverage the botocore Pinpoint API to send
messages identified with a specific phone pool.

#### Pros

- Fast to implement
- The latest PinPoint API offers goodies compared to the SNS API that we currently use for ending SMS, such as getting the cost and originating numbers from the delivery receipts via the SNS delivery queues.

#### Cons

- Have to use Pinpoint with a more complex API. We have an old implementation that we can revive for this purpose.
- We cannot have several codes shared between pools. That is an issue if we want to isolate opt-out list per service with one pool per service, as a code can only be assigned to one pool.

### Option 2: Roll out our own pool implementation

Implement a pool feature of our own with all phone numbers we have. This option
would provide great flexibility and improved monitoring, allowing us to decide
exactly which code sends which SMS and pick desired strategy such as the
round-robin strategy to favor. However, this option requires more changes and
time.

#### Pros

- Improved monitoring of used numbers.
- Our own algorithm for code selection.
- Shared codes among the different custom pools.
- The opt-out feature can be customized to our exact needs (as we do not depend on AWS pool and their own opt-out list implementation).

#### Cons

- More effort and resources to implement compared to other solutions.

## Additional considerations

Using the AWS pools as a first step is quick way to leverage the short code as
intended. We can later on implement our own pools in order to have extra
flexibility with the opt-out list tailored to our needs (one per service).

## Decision

Considering our need for flexibility and fast delivery, we decided on first
leveraging the AWS pools and if we have a need for more customizations, we
would roll out our own pool implementation afterward. This is an incremental
approach and we do not have to stick with AWS options once our requirements
change.

## Consequences

A few months after the writing of this ADR, we amended the short code to be
of generic usage and not only 2FA. This soften a goal of this ADR as we could
use the short code for everything. That would simplify the overall
implementation yet it would make some of our features difficult or hard to
support, such as dedicated numbers, support for more than one short code,
international SMS support (e.g. using a toll number to send to the US), etc.

Hence we are in the process of using the AWS pools at the moment with a later
plan to roll out our own pools in the long term.
