# AWS VPN for GC Notify Infrastructure
Date: 2024-02-06

## Status

**DRAFT**

## Context

GC Notify uses AWS as its cloud provider. Currently we do not have a standardized way of accessing and maintaining the infrastructure and deployments of GC Notify. Administration endpoints are either public facing (secured by SSO) or require jump boxing into a temporary Kubernetes pod and using a convoluted port-forwarding scheme. 

The existing SA&A used by the ATO for GC Notify was  incomplete with regards to remote access. The SA&A sections for remote access (ITSG-33 AC17) was only completed within the context of public access. It did not include the context of operations access (Notify developers). In order to increase security, standardize access, and comply with AC17 in ITSG-33, a VPN service should be added to GC Notify's intfrastructure. 

## Restrictions

Since we are using AWS, we are restricted to either AWS provided services or self-hosted solutions

## Options

### AWS VPN

AWS provides a first party [VPN solution](https://aws.amazon.com/vpn/) that can be leveraged and implemented via Terraform. It is based on OpenVPN.

#### Pros

- Can be managed in Terraform
- Integrates directly with AWS CDS Single-Sign-On
- VPN Client Is Cross Platform
- Managed Service Requires Little Administration
- The VPN endpoint protection is done by AWS

#### Cons

- Comparitively Expensive
- Cloud specific means that we could not directly migrate this to another Provider

#### Cost

AWS charges per hour based on the number of subnet associations. The GC Notify Infrastructure would require associations with three private subnets. This results in a monthly charge of approximately $200 per month per AWS account. Given that GC Notify has 3 accounts (Dev/Staging/Prod), that results in $600 per month, or approximately $7200 per year for all three environments.

#### Administration Overhead

There is minimal administration required once it has been deployed. It is a fully managed service provided by AWS.

### Self Hosted OpenVPN on Kubernetes

It is possible to self-host an installation of [OpenVPN](https://openvpn.net/). OpenVPN is an industry standard, open source VPN solution that uses SSL communication. 

It is possible to host this as a docker image in Kubernetes, and expose the endpoint. This would be roughly equivalent in network communication to how we currently do jump boxes. The helm chart is currently in a deprecated state, but the underlying docker image is still alive and well. It would be relatively simple to fork the deprecated helm chart and maintain our own copy.

#### Pros
- Since this would use existing resources, the cost would be very low, if not $0
- Kubernetes would manage the container life-cycle and autoscaling

#### Cons
- There would be additional work for the core team to do, that would include patching
- If the Kubernetes cluster experiences problems, there would be no way to connect to the VPN
- There may be some additional network routing complications
- Not a self managed solution
- Does not directly integrate with CDS AWS SSO (Could be configured potentially with additional work)

#### Cost

This would be virtually free in terms of cloud spending since our Kubernetes cluster is constantly under utilized. It would be more expensive in salary time due to the maintenance overhead.

### Self Hosted OpenVPN on an EC2

Instead of containerizing and using OpenVPN on Kubernetes, we could create and deploy an EC2 instance and install OpenVPN on that.

#### Pros
- Solves the problem of being unable to connect if the Kubernetes cluster is down

#### Cons
- Autoscaling would not be configured (although we have so few users this may not be an issue)
- Additional compute costs
- Not a self managed solution
- Would require an additional set of automation tools to facilitate the installation and configuration of OpenVPN (I.e Ansible)
- Does not directly integrate with CDS AWS SSO (Could be configured potentially with additional work)
- May trigger a new ATO process
- Breaks CDS policy of not using IaaS

#### Cost
The cost for a single EC2 instance would be very low per month, approximately $75. Salary cost would be greatly increased since it would require the installation and maintenance of OpenVPN, an additional automation suite, and a new workflow.

### Notes on Administration Overdhead

Administration overhead is very closely related to cost, as the more administrative overhead required, the higher the cost in salary dollars. Although the two self hosted options are either free or very inexpensive from a usage perspective, they have a very high cost in salary dollars as they will require ongoing administration and maintenance.

## Decision

After consideration, Notify decided to proceed with the AWS VPN solution. 

### Decision Rationale

The AWS VPN solution, while more expensive, significantly simplifies the deployment and management aspect of the VPN. It also greatly simplifies IAM since it leverages the existing CDS AWS SSO solution. The expense per month in cloud costs is made up for by the lack of salary expense required. On a monthly basis, there is little to no maintenance required. Given that the Core team is made up of only three individuals at the moment, there aren't enough cycles available to adopt an additional technology to manage on a more frequent basis.

## Consequences

_TODO: Describe foreseen and felt consequences of the decision (possible after 1-3 months)._
