# TITLE

Date: 2024-01-22

## Status

**DRAFT**.

## Context

A new *development* environment has been created with recent effort around
business continuity plan (BCP)<sup>[1]</sup>. It was created from scratch
with the goal of determining how much effort and time it takes to recreate
a whole GCNotify environment from scratch. Since then, the team used this
environment to experiment on new infrastructure changes in an isolated manner,
increasing velocity with changes of this nature.

This also comes at a time when there is a desire to automate furthermore the
release process among the team, potentially fastening the release process and
decreasing the time spent on the ops lead routine tasks. This has to be done
with certain considerations in mind such as risk, testing, traceability,
rollback and accountability.

> <sup>[1]</sup> A business continuity plan (BCP) is a strategic playbook created to help an organization maintain or quickly resume business functions in the face of disruption, whether that disruption is caused by a natural disaster, civic unrest, cyberattack, or any other threat to business operations.

## Goals

It is necessary to take a step back and decide what are the team's primary's objectives for this effort.

### More automation

_TODO: fill in the blanks_

### Less chores for the ops lead

_TODO: fill in the blanks_

### More release autonomy

_TODO: fill in the blanks_

### Isolated development environment

_TODO: fill in the blanks_

### Isolated experimental infrastructure environment

_TODO: fill in the blanks_

## Options

This section lists suggestions made by the team with different considerations
and goals. We'll first review the current CI/CD process.

### Current process

_TODO: Insert current process diagram._

### Option 1

_TODO: Describe an option._

## Additional considerations

_TODO: Describe extras in here._

## Decision

_TODO: Describe the way forward._

## Consequences

_TODO: Describe foreseen and felt consequences of the decision (possible after 1-3 months)._
